Zephyr 2.5 upgrade (#736)
zmkfirmware/zmk: docs/blog/2021-06-21-zephyr-2-5.md

---
title: "Zephyr 2.5 Update"
author: Pete Johanson
author_title: Project Creator
author_url: https://gitlab.com/petejohanson
author_image_url: https://www.gravatar.com/avatar/2001ceff7e9dc753cf96fcb2e6f41110
tags: [firmware, zephyr, core]
---

> Happy to announce that we have completed the work to upgrade ZMK to [Zephyr 2.5](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/2.5.0/releases/release-notes-2.5.html)!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I'm happy to announce that we have completed the work to upgrade ZMK to [Zephyr 2.5](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/2.5.0/releases/release-notes-2.5.html)!
```

> A big part of this work was some _major_ refactors and improvements by [innovaker] to our [zmk-docker](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk-docker/) Docker image and GH Actions automation. With the updated changes there, we can now:

Reviewer: I'd drop the lead-in sentence to provide more flexibility for the grammar used in the bullet points ...
```suggestion
A big part of this work was some _major_ refactors and improvements by [innovaker] to our [zmk-docker](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk-docker/) Docker image and GH Actions automation.
```

> A big part of this work was some _major_ refactors and improvements by [innovaker] to our [zmk-docker](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk-docker/) Docker image and GH Actions automation. With the updated changes there, we can now:

Reviewer: Thanks 😄 Don't forget to mention you did the upgrade itself!

Author: Added.

> - GH and layer caching for improved build times.

Reviewer: I'd keep it simple for users ...
```suggestion
- Faster build times with improved caching.
```

> - Automated tests run against newly built images to verify them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Integration tests which automatically verify new images.
```

> - PRs to the repo now properly build and run the tests as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- PRs to the repo now build properly and run the tests as well.
```

- Build images for multiple target architectures, e.g. `zmk-build-riscv64`, all in parallel.

> - Create nightly builds to be sure we're pulling in the latest OS/package updates, to ensure we keep our images up to date, address any reported vulnerabilities, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Nightly builds to be sure we're pulling in the latest OS/package updates, to ensure we keep our images up to date, address any reported vulnerabilities, etc.
```

> - Allow us to upgrade to newer Zephyr SDK and Zephyr versions, more quickly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Faster upgrade paths for future Zephyr SDK and Zephyr versions.
```

> - Publish candidate tags, and then promote tested ones to final tags like `zmk-dev-arm:2.5`.

Reviewer: We already had this, it's probably not worth mentioning.
```suggestion
```

## Getting The Changes

Use the following steps to update to the latest tooling in order to properly use the new ZMK changes:

### Github Actions

> Existing Github Actions will pull down Zephyr 2.5 automatically, and should work, fine as is. However, to be safe, you should edit the `.github/workflows/build.yml` to change `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.4` to `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.5`.

Reviewer: This would be better as a bullet-point list of instructions.

Author: Yup. Refactored.

> Existing Github Actions will pull down Zephyr 2.5 automatically, and should work, fine as is. However, to be safe, you should edit the `.github/workflows/build.yml` to change `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.4` to `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.5`.

Author: AFAICT, it should be a drop in replacement to switch tot hew newer docker image, so I will add a note about that.

> Existing Github Actions will pull down Zephyr 2.5 automatically, and should work, fine as is. However, to be safe, you should edit the `.github/workflows/build.yml` to change `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.4` to `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.5`.

Reviewer: If so, I'd suggest recommending that they replace their `build.yml` with the new syntax anyway because it's a lot simpler to understand.  i.e. point them at:
https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk-config-template/blob/main/.github/workflows/build.yml
or
https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk-config-split-template/blob/main/.github/workflows/build.yml
(which both need updating come to think of it)

> Existing Github Actions will pull down Zephyr 2.5 automatically, and should work, fine as is. However, to be safe, you should edit the `.github/workflows/build.yml` to change `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.4` to `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.5`.

Reviewer: That said, I guess the placeholders in the templates aren't immediately obvious.

> Existing Github Actions will pull down Zephyr 2.5 automatically, and should work, fine as is. However, to be safe, you should edit the `.github/workflows/build.yml` to change `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.4` to `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.5`.

Reviewer: This seems reasonably recent if you need a test case ...
https://github.com/krikun98/zmk-config/blob/master/.github/workflows/build.yml

> Existing Github Actions will pull down Zephyr 2.5 automatically, and should work, fine as is. However, to be safe, you should edit the `.github/workflows/build.yml` to change `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.4` to `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.5`.

Author: > If so, I'd suggest recommending that they replace their `build.yml` with the new syntax anyway because it's a lot simpler to understand. i.e. point them at:
> https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk-config-template/blob/main/.github/workflows/build.yml
> or
> https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk-config-split-template/blob/main/.github/workflows/build.yml
> (which both need updating come to think of it)

I don't think we should be suggesting this, *lots* of our users are new to `git` and GitHub, so asking them to refactor portions of some obscure YAML file is *not* productive, IMHO. I'd rather we give them a simple "replace X with Y" that anyone can follow easily.

> Existing Github Actions will pull down Zephyr 2.5 automatically, and should work, fine as is. However, to be safe, you should edit the `.github/workflows/build.yml` to change `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.4` to `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.5`.

Reviewer: Fair enough.  Happy to kick this bucket down the road some more.

> Existing Github Actions will pull down Zephyr 2.5 automatically, and should work, fine as is. However, to be safe, you should edit the `.github/workflows/build.yml` to change `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.4` to `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.5`.

Reviewer: > AFAICT, it should be a drop in replacement to switch tot hew newer docker image, so I will add a note about that.

As in ... https://github.com/innovaker/zmk-config/actions/runs/958253475/workflow ... ?

> Existing Github Actions will pull down Zephyr 2.5 automatically, and should work, fine as is. However, to be safe, you should edit the `.github/workflows/build.yml` to change `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.4` to `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.5`.

Reviewer: On the bright side, `zephyr-west-action-arm` does build the 2.5 branch without complaining.

> Existing Github Actions will pull down Zephyr 2.5 automatically, and should work, fine as is. However, to be safe, you should edit the `.github/workflows/build.yml` to change `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.4` to `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.5`.

Author: Reworded this to be clear it is for user configs.

> Existing Github Actions will pull down Zephyr 2.5 automatically, and should work, fine as is. However, to be safe, you should edit the `.github/workflows/build.yml` to change `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.4` to `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.5`.

Reviewer: The recent improvements to the instructions cover anyone using `zmk-build-arm:2.4` but I still think those using `zephyr-west-action-arm` are going to be perplexed when they can't find `zmk-build-arm` in their `build.yml`.  As such, I'd imagine ...
- some users just ignore it and leave their `build.yml` as is.
- some users will attempt to substitute `zephyr-west-action-arm` with `zmk-build-arm:2.5` which won't work (see above).
- some users will fall into #help.

2.5 isn't the problem, but it compounds the underlying issue that the zmk-config setup/templating system wasn't designed to facilitate upgrades.  And I suspect 2.6 even more so because it has dependency changes.

Short of a new setup approach, I suggest nipping this in the bud with a migration guide, migration script or a note to remake their `zmk-config` repository.  At minimum a note in the blog highlighting this possible scenario to the longtime users.

> Existing Github Actions will pull down Zephyr 2.5 automatically, and should work, fine as is. However, to be safe, you should edit the `.github/workflows/build.yml` to change `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.4` to `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.5`.

Author: Yeah, I think a note to highlight this, and suggest re-generating their config repo and dropping back in their keymaps, etc if they want to upgrade. I don't think investing time in migration scripts is worthwhile at this point.

> Existing Github Actions will pull down Zephyr 2.5 automatically, and should work, fine as is. However, to be safe, you should edit the `.github/workflows/build.yml` to change `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.4` to `zmkfirmware/zmk-build-arm:2.5`.

Reviewer: WFM.

### VSCode Docker Integration

If you build locally using the VSCode Docker integration, then after pulling the latest ZMK `main` and reloading the project, you should be prompted to rebuild the remote container, Click Rebuild and once completed, VSCode will be running using the updated Docker image.

> If you're not prompted to reload, hit `Ctrl` + `Shift` + `P` and then run the `Remote Containers: Rebuild Container`.

Reviewer: Have you tested these instructions?

I'm wondering if it differs between projects stored on the host vs. projects stored in a volume.  We should test both first.

Author: Yes, this was what I did locally to verify things.

> ### VSCode Docker Integration
> 
> If you build locally using the VSCode Docker integration, then after pulling the latest ZMK `main` and reloading the project, you should be prompted to rebuild the remote container, Click Rebuild and once completed, VSCode will be running using the updated Docker image.
> 
> If you're not prompted to reload, hit `Ctrl` + `Shift` + `P` and then run the `Remote Containers: Rebuild Container`.

Reviewer: To align with ZMK's documentation and improve the readability ...

```suggestion
### VS Code & Docker (Dev Container)
If you build locally using VS Code & Docker then:

- pull the latest ZMK `main`
- reload the project
- if you are prompted to rebuild the remote container, click `Rebuild`
- otherwise, press  `Ctrl` + `Shift` + `P` and run  `Remote Containers: Rebuild Container`

Once the container has rebuilt, VS Code will be running the 2.5 Docker image.
```

It's probably easier for most users to open the project before pulling.  What do you think?

> If you're not prompted to reload, hit `Ctrl` + `Shift` + `P` and then run the `Remote Containers: Rebuild Container`.

Reviewer: `F1` might be a better option than `Ctrl` + `Shift` + `P`.

Author: Done.

### Local Toolchain

> Your existing Zephyr SDK should build ZMK properly, but if you want to update to the latest, grab the [0.12.4 release](https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/sdk-ng/releases/tag/v0.12.4) and follow the instructions to install it.

Reviewer: Alternatively we could point them at the latest documentation here:
https://zmk.dev/docs/development/setup#toolchain-installation
plus a note to delete their existing SDK folder.

Author: I dig it. Updated.

## Getting The Code

> If building locally or in VSCode with Docker, simply pull the latest changes from `main` to get the ZMK updates to move to Zephyr 2.5.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If building locally or in VS Code with Docker, simply pull the latest changes from `main` to get the ZMK updates to move to Zephyr 2.5.
```

> 

Reviewer: Is this section not a duplicate of `Getting The Changes` above?

Author: Yeah, refactored this. Thanks.

> ## West Module Updates
> 
> Updated Zephyr needs updated Zephyr dependencies as well. Run the following in your ZMK checkout:
> 
> ```
> west update
> ```
> 
> From there, you should be ready to build as normal!
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

It's not completely clear (visually) that:
- `West Module Updates` is a separate section to `Getting The Changes`
- it must be done afterwards
  - but *not* for GitHub Actions.

I can see users falling into #help because they didn't `west update`.

Perhaps add it individually into each relevant sub-section of `Getting The Changes` (perhaps call it `Getting The Update`).

Author: Yeah, I moved this into the VS Code/Docker and Local Host Development sections, and removed it as a separate section.
